     STRATEGO is the American version of the game now popular on the 
Continent.  While the pieces have military designs and are maneuvered 
across the playing board, it is not a war game.
 
     STRATEGO is a fast moving game which is easy to learn, delightful 
to play and which provies a never-ending variety of ways to outwit your 
opponent.  The colorful playing pieces are marked according to military 
rank which are kept hidden from the opponent as they are places and 
moved across the board to capture your opponent's "Flag".  The rank of 
the piece is revealed only when an opposing piece is "struck" or 
attacked.  The higher ranked piece removes the less rank.  There are 
"bombs" which "blow-up" and remove any attacking piece except the 
"Miner" who can dismantle and remove the "Bomb".  Even the "Marshal", 
the highest ranking piece, has a weakness, in that the lowly "Spy" can 
remove him from the game.
 
     The exciting elements of skillfull planning, cever deception, 
memory and suspense make STRATEGO a thoroughly delightful game.
 
                           RULES FOR STRATEGO
 
The OBJECT of the game is to capture the opponent's flag.
TO START THE GAME:
 1. Place the board between the players so that the name STRATEGO is 
    facing each contestant.
 2. One player takes the Red and the other the Blue playing pieces.  RED 
    starts first.
 3. Each player gets an army of 40 pieces in order of rank from high to 
    low, consisting of: 1 Marshal (1), 1 General (2), 2 Colonels (3), 3 
    Majors (4), 4 Captains (5), 4 Lieutenants (6), 4 Sergeants (7), 5 
    Miners (8), 8 Scouts (9), 1 Spy (S).  These are all moveable 
    pieces.  There are also 6 Bombs and 1 Flag which are not moveable.  
    Note that the moveable pieces have a number in the upper left corner 
    to designate the order of rank.  Thus, the Marshal is ranked 1 
    (highest), the General 2, the Colonels 3, and so on to the Spy who is 
    marked with an "S".
 4. The players place one piece in each square of their half of the 
    board.  All squares are to be filled from each end.  That is 10 per 
    row, 4 rows deep.  The two middle rows are to be left unoccupied at 
    the start of the game.
 5. The pieces are placed with the notched ends up and the printed 
    emblem facing the player in such a way that the opponent does not 
    know the arrangement of the pieces.
 6. Read the rules of "Movement" and "Striking" so that an idea of how to 
    plan the placement of pieces will be obtained.
 
                           RULES FOR MOVEMENT
 
 1. Turns alternate, first Red, then Blue.
 2. A piece moves from square to square, one square at a time.  
    (Exception: Scout -- see rule 8)  A piece may be moved forward, 
    backward, or sideward but NOT DIAGONALLY.
 3. Note that there are two lakes in the center of the board, which 
    contain NO SQUARES.  Pieces must move around lakes and cannot move 
    where there is no square.
 4. Two pieces may not occupy the same square at the same time.
 5. A piece may not move through a square occupied by a piece nor jump 
    over a piece.
 6. Only one piece may be moved in each turn.
 7. The "Flag" and the "Bomb" pieces CANNOT be moved.  Once these pieces 
    are placed at the start of the game they MUST REMAIN IN THAT SQUARE.
 8. The "Scout" may move any number of OPEN squares foward, backward, or 
    sidwards in a striaght line if the player desires.  This movement, 
    of course, then reveals to the opponent the value of that piece.  
    Therefore, the player may choose to move the Scout only one square 
    in his turn, so as to keep the Scout's identity hidden.  The Scout 
    is valuable for probing the opponent's positions.  The Scout MAY NOT 
    MOVE &  STRIKE in the same turn.
 9. Once a piece has been moved to a square and the hand removed, it 
    cannot be moved back to its original position in that turn. 
10. Pieces CANNOT be moved back and forth between the same 2 squares in 
    3 consecutive turns. 
11. A player must either "move" or "strike" in his turn.
 
                      RULES FOR "STRIKE" OR ATTACK
 
 1. When a red and blue piece occupy adjoining squares either back to 
    back, side to side, or face to face, they are in a position to 
    attack or "strike".  NO DIAGONALS strikes can be made.
 2. A player may MOVE in his turn or STRIKE in his turn.  HE CANNOT DO 
    BOTH.  The "strike" ends the turn.  After pieces have finished the 
    "strike" move, the player who was struck has his turn to move or 
    strike.
 3. It is NOT required to "strike" when two opposing pieces are in 
    position.  A player may decide to strike, whenever he desires.
 4. Either player may strike (in his turn), not only the one who moved 
    his piece into position.
 5. To strike (or attack), the player, whose turn it is, takes up his 
    piece and lightly "strikes" the opponent's piece while at the same 
    time declaring his piece's rank.  The opponent answers by naming the 
    rank of his piece.
 6. The piece with the lower rank is lost and removed from the board.  
    The winning higher ranking piece is then MOVED IMMEDIATELY INTO THE 
    EMPTY SQUARE FORMERLY OCCUPIED BY THE LOSING PIECE.
 7. When equal ranks are struck, then BOTH pieces are lost and removed 
    from the board.
 8. A Marshal removes a General, a General removes a Colonel, a Colonel 
    removes a Major and so on down to the Spy, which is the lowest 
    ranking piece.
 9. The Spy, however, has the special privilege of being able to remove 
    only the Marshal provided he strikes FIRST.  That is, if the Spy 
    "strikes" the Marshal in his turn, the Marshal is removed.  However, 
    if the Marshal "strikes" first, the Spy is removed.  All other 
    pieces remove the Spy regardless of who strikes first.
10. When any piece (except a Miner) strikes a Bomb (Bang!) that piece is 
    lost and is removed from the board.  The Bomb does NOT move into the 
    empty square, but remains in its original position at all times.  
    When a Miner strikes a Bomb, the Bomb is lost and the Miner moves 
    into the unoccupied square.
11. A Bomb cannot strike, but rather must wait until a moveable piece 
    strikes it.
12. Remember, the Flag also can never be moved.
 
                             TO END THE GAME
 
     Whenever a player "strikes" his opponent's Flag, the game ENDS and 
he is the WINNER.
     Note:  If a player cannot move a piece or "strike" in his turn, he 
must give up and declare his opponent the winner.
 
                        SOME SUGGESTIONS FOR STRATEGY
 
     From the above it is clear that the original placement of the 
pieces can determine the outcome.  It is therefor good defensive tactics 
to surround the Flag with a few Bombs.  However, to mislead the 
opponent, it is recommended to place a few Bombs at some distance from 
the Flag.
     A few high ranking pieces in the front lines is a good plan, but 
the player who rapidly loses his high officers stands in a weak position.
     Scouts in the front line are useful to probe the strength of the 
opposing pieces.
     Miners are very important near the end of the game so it is good 
strategy to place some in the rear ranks.
 
-- Taken from Stratego Box Top.
   (c) 1961 Milton Bradley
